# MultiCartGrad
Early identification of cartilage defect progression in patients with patellofemoral osteoarthritis (PFOA) is crucial for the timely implementation of effective, stepwise treatments. However, this process requires substantial expertise from radiologists for accurate interpretation. In this study, we propose a deep learning model named the Multimodal Cartilage Defect Grading Model with Clinical Priors (MultiCartGrad) for fine-grained grading of cartilage defect in PFOA patients. MultiCartGrad uses multi-slice, multi-sequence, and multi-modal attention to jointly integrate multimodal information to emphasize lesion-relevant regions. To evaluate the performance of our model, we construct the first and largest multimodal PFOA dataset, comprising 1,824 individuals from three medical centers, each with five types of MRI scans, clinical data, and corresponding radiology report. Our model achieves an average AUC of 0.891 and an average ACC of 0.739, representing the best performance among all existing SOTA methods, surpassing junior radiologists (ACC: 0.645) and competitive with senior radiologists (ACC: 0.767). On two independent external test sets, it attains ACC of 0.705 and 0.661, respectively, and also outperforms junior radiologists. Importantly, with the assistance of our model, the diagnostic accuracy of all radiologists significantly improves, increasing from an average ACC of 0.693 to 0.741. Explainability analysis reveals that the model’s decision-making process aligns with clinical knowledge, enhancing its trustworthiness and reliability in clinical practice. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first automated grading method to address the complex disease characterization of cartilage defect progression in PFOA.
